Well, we're going to be continuing this morning with our series on Long Journey Home.
And if you haven't been with us for it up to this point, what we're looking at is the journey of the children of Israel from their time of slavery in Egypt on their way to their promised land.
And in looking at that journey again, we've been looking for some of the connections it has between the Old Testament and the New Testament.
and the connection that has to our own journey as followers of Jesus.
What can we learn from that?
And just looking at different incidents from that journey.
Now, this last summer, we went through the minor prophets.
Maybe remember that series.
And I made the point then that the minor prophets are not minor because what they said wasn't important is just that they were very short books, as opposed to the longer prophets like Isaiah, Ezekiel, Jeremiah.
One of the books that we looked at was authored by a man named
Hosea.
And this morning we're going to consider some of the life story of another Hosea.
This guy is not a prophet.
Rather, he was one of Moses's, maybe Moses's prime assistant.
Now, if you're a Bible student, you may be thinking, I don't recall Moses having an assistant named Hosea.
And that's only because you know him by his nickname.
This comes from Numbers chapter 13.
These were the names of the men whom Moses sent to spy out the land, and Moses called Hosea or Hosea, the son of none, Joshua.
So who we know as Joshua, his original name was Hosea or Hosea.
So how did Hosea get turned into
Joshua.
How did you get from one name to the other?
And I'm going to give you a little Hebrew lesson this morning.
We're going to take a look at two names.
The first name being this name, Hosea.
That's what it looks like in Hebrew.
And the second one being the name Yahweh.
And that's what that looks like in Hebrew.
Now, Hosea means he delivers, okay?
Or he saves.
And that name Yahweh is the covenant name of God.
It is the
I am name.
The name first appears when Moses encounters God at the burning bush.
You recall that story?
This comes from Exodus chapter three.
Then Moses said to God, if I come to the people of Israel and say to them, the God of your fathers has sent me to you and they asked me, what is his name?
What shall I say to them?
God said to Moses, I am who I am.
And he said, say this to the people of Israel, I am has sent me
to you and that's where this name Yahweh comes from.
It was a name that the Jews held in such reverence that when they were reading scriptures they would never speak the name aloud.
And in place of that they would put in the word Adonai or Lord.
And we still find a nod to this in our English Bibles.
If you're in reading and you see the word Lord but it's in small caps
That's what they've done.
They've taken that word Yahweh, and they have substituted the word Lord, like the Jews are doing reading it.
But they've let you know that by putting in small caps there.
So we still kind of observe that custom.
Now I want you to watch what happens when you take these two names and you start doing some merging.
The first thing we're going to do is we're going to get rid of the vowel pointing.
And I know you're worried about that, right?
What the vowel pointing is in Hebrew, Hebrew originally didn't have any vowels in it.
I mean, there were vowels, they just weren't written.
And in fact, all the letters ran together.
They didn't break between their words.
You just have a stream of consonants.
What you can understand, the problem is that it could make over time.
As long as you know the context, you're fine.
But if you forget the context, let's just take the letters BGN.
What is BGN?
Is that big one?
Is that be gone?
is that a lot of different ways you could read that.
And so the scribes became concerned that future generations might forget what the right vowels were to put the right letters.
Because they didn't want to add anything to God's word, they decided that they would create a vowel system that went above and below the consonants.
So when you read Hebrew, you read from right to left, and you read top to bottom, and those little dots and dashes, those are the vowels.
So for our purposes, we're just gonna get rid of those, okay?
Now, all of Jose's birth name, we find it in his new name, Joshua.
But then also, the covenant name of God, Yahweh, the first part of that gets merged in as well.
And what you end up with is a name that means Yahweh delivers, or Joshua.
Do you recall what the angel told Mary, actually what he told Joseph about the baby that Mary was going to have?
This comes from Matthew chapter one.
Says, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream saying, Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary as your wife for that which is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit.
She will bear a son and you shall call his name Jesus, which is Yaisu, which is the same in Greek as Joshua.
You'll call his name Jesus or Joshua, for he will save his people from their sin.
You see, there's the meaning again.
You're gonna give him this name and the name means God saves.
Now to me, the fact that Moses upgraded Joshua's name in that way, tells me right away that he saw something special about this young man.
There was something that distinguished Joshua in the eyes of Moses.
So what do we know about Joshua?
The giving of his upgraded name isn't explained until we get to the account of the spies being sent into the Promised Land, but the fact was Joshua had been distinguishing himself long before that ever happened.
The first mention of Joshua is in the book of Exodus when he was tasked by Moses with assembling the militia to go and fight against the marauding Amalekites.
We looked at that a few weeks ago if you recall.
But in Numbers 11, 28, we find this little phrase.
Joshua, the son of none, the assistant of Moses from his youth.
So from the time Joshua was a young man, Moses had seen something in him that said, this is a guy that I want to be working with me, closely with me, my protege, if you will.
Now, this, of course, occurred a number of years after Israel had completed their conquest of the Promised Land.
Oh, this is, so the question is, how old was Joshua when he started serving as Moses' assistant?
We don't get a lot of clues as to Joshua's age except this one.
After these things, Joshua, the son of none, the servant of the Lord, died being 110 years old.
That's the only definite marker we get as to how old Joshua was at some point.
And this, of course, comes a number of years after Israel has come into the Promised Land.
Another marker people sometimes point to is the age of Caleb at the time he was sent on his spying mission into the Promised Land.
This is what Caleb said.
Caleb says, I was 40 years old when Moses, the servant of the Lord, sent me from Kedish Barnia to spy out the land.
And since Joshua and Caleb appear side by side as the two faithful spies who alone were permitted to enter the promised land, a lot of folks conclude that, well, Joshua must have been about the same age as Caleb.
That's just an assumption.
There's nothing in the text that says that.
If so, that would mean that Joshua had started assisting Moses sometime in his mid to late thirties, if you do the math, which doesn't really sound like what you would describe as a youth.
I ran across an article by a Jewish rabbi, and he proposes another age.
And if he's right, it helps to answer a kind of puzzling passage that you run into.
And I understand this is a complete Bible nerd detour we're going on here, all right?
But just bear with me.
This guy's name is Alejo Schatz and he gets his clues from this passage in Numbers 14.
And this is where God declares his judgment on the unbelieving generation.
Now we looked at this story last week and we talked about what happened at Kedish Barnia, right?
They get to Kedish Barnia.
They decided to spend the spies in.
Eight of the spies come back saying, he has the beautiful lamb, but there's not a chance that we can take it.
They've got these fortified skyscrapers.
There's giants in the land.
Two of the spies, Joshua and Caleb say,
We can do this because God is with us.
And you're calling us at that point that God sends Israel in that 40-year detour.
He says, none of this generation is going to enter the land only your children are going to get to go.
The only exceptions, of course, being Caleb and Joshua.
And then you get these two passages and see if you can spot what seems odd.
These are both in the same chapter within just a few verses of each other.
This from Numbers 14.
None of the men who've seen my glory and my signs that I did in Egypt and the wilderness and yet have put me to the test these ten times and have not obeyed my voice shall see the land that I swore to give to their fathers and none of those who despise me'll sure see it but my servant Caleb because he has a different spirit.
Okay, now you jump down just a few verses and you find this.
All your number listed in the census from 20 years old and upward
who have grumbled against me, not one, shall come into the land where I swore that I would make you dwell, except Caleb, the son of Jefana, and Joshua, the son of none.
Do you see the little weirdness there?
In verse 24, the only person mentioned is Caleb.
And then in verse 30, it says Caleb and Joshua.
So what happened?
Did Moses just forget the first time to include Joshua?
Here's what this rabbi proposes.
I think it makes a lot of sense.
He points to this first passage.
And what it says is, none of the men who have seen my glory and my signs that I did in Egypt.
And then in the second one, he talks about all your number listed in the census from 20 years old and upward, not one of them shall come into the land.
Okay, so when was the census taken?
We find this in Numbers 1, verses 1 through 3.
The Lord tells Moses to take a census.
And the cutoff point for separating the men from the boys is 20 years old and upward.
If you're under 20, you didn't get counted in the census.
If you're above 20, then you get counted.
And what this rabbi suggests is that Caleb was older than Joshua.
That Caleb was above the age of 20, while the people were still in Egypt.
So he was a man.
The Lord said, none of the men who were in Egypt who saw my miracles and yet still have doubted me, none of those men are going to enter.
But then when the census is taken, two years after leaving Egypt, he proposes that Joshua had turned 20.
And so the Lord says, none of those in the census will enter except Joshua and Caleb.
You see that group would include Joshua, the first group would not.
If that is right,
because I know you're dying to find out, Tim, what is your point?
If that is true, what it tells us is that Joshua probably started serving Moses when he was about 19 years old, which would fit this description of him serving Moses from the time he was a youth.
He was a young man who early in life was chosen by Moses to be an assistant.
I think there's something worth thinking about in light of Joshua's young age, because what we see is
A man who from an early age was available and engaged and willing for God to use him.
He made himself available to Moses.
When Moses needed someone to lead the charge, Joshua was there.
Sarah mentioned this too.
We find Joshua accompanying Moses in some very holy moments.
This from Exodus 24, the Lord said to Moses, come up to me on the mountain and wait there.
This is being called with Mount Sinai.
that I may give you the tablets of stone with the law and the commandments, which I've written for their instruction.
So Moses rose with his assistant Joshua.
Joshua gets to go up with Moses.
Or this, the thing that Sarah referred to, Moses used to take the tin and pitch it outside the camp, far from the camp.
He called it the tin of meeting.
Everyone who saw the Lord would go out to the tin of meeting, which was outside the camp.
When Moses entered the tent, the pillar of cloud would descend and stand at the entrance, and the Lord would speak with Moses.
Thus the Lord used to speak to Moses face to face as a man speaks to his friend.
When Moses turned again into the camp, his assistant Joshua, the son of none, a young man would not depart from the tent.
The picture begins to form for you is that there is this young person who seriously cares about the things of God
and the people of God.
When the time comes, 40 years later, that God tells Moses to appoint Joshua as his successor, Joshua's fitness for service does not arise out of a vacuum.
I don't know if Josh had any sense of what his future role might be, but the fact was he had been preparing himself for a long time.
Thinking about the New Testament, I have no doubt that the Apostle Paul would have applauded
a young Joshua, just like he encouraged his young protege, Timothy.
Paul said these words to Timothy.
He said, let no one despise you for your youth.
But set the believers an example in speech, in conduct, in love, in faith, in purity.
Paul in that same letter suggests something that an up-and-coming leader, like Timothy, might aspire to.
He says, the saying is trustworthy.
If anyone aspires to the office of overseer, he desires a noble task.
Ambition.
The drive to succeed.
Is it a healthy thing for a Christian?
Is it a healthy thing in the church to be ambitious?
Our world is full of ambitious people.
I've known students who from the time they were in junior high,
Sometimes even younger had set their sights on attending an elite military academy.
Maybe they wanted to go to Annapolis or West Point or the Air Force Academy.
And everything they did was geared toward getting that appointment, to get into that academy.
That was their ambition.
And of course, getting that academy was just a stepping stone to a higher goal.
They aspired to become an officer.
And in attaining that dream,
They started to aggressively shape their resume to get higher ranks, seek out the right postings, get the right credentials, earn the ribbons that will hopefully propel them to a higher rank.
Maybe they dream one day of being a general or an admiral themselves, or maybe they're looking beyond their military career, and they think about the doors that could open for them in politics or in industry if they have enough accomplishments behind them.
or maybe it's a bright young computer programmer trying to climb the ranks of Silicon Valley.
Bouncing from one venture capital startup to the next, trying to ricochet their way to the top of the corporate ladder, putting in those 80 to 100 hour weeks to keep themselves in the cutting edge of technology.
Because if you get there, if you prove yourself, the rewards can be immense.
Maybe you saw a few weeks ago, Mark Zuckerberg just signed a 24-year-old AI researcher to a four-year, $250 million contract.
Not bad for being 24.
But of course, you know how it goes.
The tales are legion of ambitious people who have shipwrecked lives, casualties of their ambitions run amok.
marriages that get ruined, children who are estranged, feel abandoned, colleagues who get alienated in a dog eat dog race for the top, personal lives demonstrated mentally, physically, spiritually.
And you understand why Jesus said, what does a prophet, a man or a woman, to gain the whole world, to achieve all of your ambitions and yet lose your own soul?
So it's no wonder that ambition is often viewed with skepticism.
The fear that we become somehow a modern day version of the mythical Icarus.
Remember Icarus?
He was the guy who built himself some wings out of feathers and wax and was so ecstatic over his ability to fly that he flew higher and higher until he flew too close to the sun, melted his wings and fell to his death.
But not all ambition is bad.
Motivation is a powerful tool for good when it's focused on the right goal and when it's kept within the right bounds.
And Paul here recommends a specific kind of ambition, an ambition to become a leader among God's people.
Of course, I think we've all seen the damage that's been brought by some Christian leaders who've been motivated by misplaced ambition.
Because you can have lots of misplaced ambition within the church.
leaders who pursue a set of criteria that in the world's eyes signify a great leader.
Big attendance at your church services, big budgets, big building programs, best selling books, speaking tours, TV, radio, social media, influence, all those markers, all those metrics that we can look at and say, now there is a leader of great significance.
And I'd say that none of those things in themselves are bad, except when they become the goal of our ambitions.
When externals become more important than internals, people who end up using the church to fuel their egos and enrich their bank accounts.
See, Paul didn't see anything wrong with a young person being ambitious for leadership, but only if that ambition had the right goals.
And in suggesting it's a good thing to desire leadership in the church,
Paul immediately then lists his metrics for greatness.
And none of them have anything to do with congregation size or books written or funds raised.
Rather, what he lists are metrics of character, a focus on who we're becoming on the inside.
He lists 14 essential godly traits of a godly leader.
The traits, and you can read them, read his letter to Timothy, but they include
demonstrated integrity, faithfulness, self-control, a generous, gentle, hospitable spirit, a growing knowledge of God's Word that would allow them to teach others.
And from all the clues that we can pick up about Joshua, I think we see a young man living generations before Paul's protege, Timothy, who was aspiring to develop and was demonstrating those kinds of traits.
He was a man of growing character because he had a great love for God.
So I guess I put a challenge out to any of you who are south of middle age.
The challenge would be that you consider what it means to prepare yourself to serve and to lead.
Recent statistics say that the church in America is facing a leadership crisis because there aren't enough young pastors to meet the need.
But of course, pastors are just one level of leadership within the church.
For the body of Christ of function, there are leaders needed in all kinds of other areas.
It might be serving as a lay leader, a deacon on a ministry team, teaching a Sunday school class, being a counselor at a youth camp, leading in worship, leading in a home Bible study, serving as a church elder.
I would say to all of us,
not only to the young, to aspire to something to benefit the body of Christ.
And in doing that, aspire not to achieve greatness, but aspire to become the kind of person that God can use as a great leader.
I'd also say that those are the kind of spiritual leaders that we should follow.
It's really easy to get our attention turned to just big names and popular people.
And there's nothing wrong with someone being popular.
But we should always be looking to say, what is the character?
Who are the leaders that I'm following?
Are they men and women of true godly character?
What difference does that make?
Well, we find this from the end of Joshua's life.
Joshua, the son of none, the servant of the Lord, died being 110 years old.
And Israel served the Lord all the days of Joshua.
You see, the impact of his life.
He was a man, a character.
who led well, led with character, and the impact it had on the generation that he led, was it helped them to follow God well also.
As I was studying on the life of Joshua, I ran into an episode that quite honestly, I had almost forgotten about it, and it just kind of jumped out at me, and I wanna take us there.
This happens many years later, Moses has died,
Joshua has assumed his role as leader of the nation.
The nation has just crossed over the boundary into the Promised Land, and they've celebrated their first Passover in the Land.
And now they're on the cusp of their first great battle of conquest.
They are about to go up against the walled city of Jericho.
And suddenly this happens.
It comes from Joshua chapter five.
When Joshua was by Jericho,
He lifted up his eyes and looked and behold, a man was standing before him with his drawn sword in his hand.
And Joshua went to him and said to him, are you for us or for our adversaries?
And he said, no.
But I am the commander of the army of the Lord.
Now I have come.
And Joshua fell on his face to the earth
and worshiped and said to him, what does my Lord say to his servant?
And the commander of the Lord's army said to Joshua, take off your sandals from your feet for the place where you are standing is holy.
And Joshua did so.
So who was that?
This mysterious figure suddenly shows up.
and identifies himself as the commander of the Lord's army.
And there's something about this man's presence that is deeply unsettling to Joshua because his immediate impulse when this mysterious commander identifies himself is to fall flat on his face in worship.
And one thought might be, well, it was an angel.
Maybe it was an angel that appeared to Joshua, but know what happened or rather what didn't happen when Joshua prostrated himself.
Joshua falls on his face and the commander does not tell him to get up again.
He leaves him there.
Now consider that compared to a similar story we have all the way up in the book of Revelation.
John is confronted here by a powerful angel and John says, I fell down to worship at the feet of the angel, but he said to me, you must not do that.
I'm a fellow servant with you, worship God.
So a person falls down to worship in front of an angel and the angel says, don't do that.
Joshua falls down in front of the command of the Lord's army and the commander just leaves in there.
And then there's this whole thing about taking off your sandals because where your standing is holy ground.
Remember any place else that that kind of language has been used?
Burning Bush.
Moses encounters this manifestation of God's presence.
And the Lord says to him, take off your shoes.
Take off your sandals, you're standing on holy ground.
In other words, this mysterious commander seems to be saying, if you're in my presence, you're in the presence of the Lord.
I think this is what theologians call a Christophany.
Fancy word, it just means an Old Testament appearance of Jesus.
We have a few instances where a mysterious figure like that appears in the Old Testament.
in ways that seem uniquely fitted to Jesus.
When it comes to being the commander of the Lord's army, that is certainly description that fits Jesus uniquely.
Again, this revelation.
Then I saw heaven open and behold a white horse.
The one sitting on it is called faithful and true, and in righteousness he judges and makes war.
The armies of heaven, arrayed in fine linen, white and pure, were following him on white horses.
On his robe and on his thigh, he has a name written, King of Kings and Lord of Lords.
I think Jesus showed up.
Joshua was about to enter into a time of intense conflict.
There were battles to be fought.
The thing that gave him courage was the divine promise that God was with him.
Remember when Joshua first assumed his role of leadership, one of the things that the Lord's system repeatedly is, do not be afraid.
Take courage, I am with you.
Which means me wonder why when that is what has given Joshua the courage, the courage to be the one spy who brought back a faithful word, the courage to step into the big shoes that Moses had left, the courage to cross that Jordan, why is it
that right at this point, when Joshua needs all the assurance he can get, would the command of the Lord's army show up with a message like this?
Joshua says, whose side are you on?
Wouldn't you expect the Lord to say, Joshua, don't worry buddy, I'm on your side 100%.
Instead, the commander says, I'm not on your side.
I can only assume God wanted to make it clear that his support
and his blessing were only with Joshua as long as Joshua was aligned with the agenda and the priorities of the Lord.
Joshua couldn't assume God's help just by virtue of him being the leader of Israel.
You only have to look at the later history of Israel long after Joshua's time to see what happens when people get this wrong.
Again, we looked at the minor prophets this summer.
Let me take you to just one thing out of the book of Micah, this from Micah chapter three,
Listen to me, you leaders of Israel.
You hate justice and you twist all that is right.
And yet, all of you claim to depend on the Lord.
No harm can come to us, you say, for the Lord is here among us.
Hear what they're saying, God is on our side.
Because of you, Jerusalem will be reduced to ruins.
The Lord says to their leaders, you got this a little mixed up.
You think that somehow the default position is that I will always take your side.
But the problem is, you're not doing things my way.
See, God was with Joshua as long as he was fighting God's way.
The question is never is God on our side.
The question is always, are we on his?
And the sobering message to Joshua was that the commander of the Lord's army
was not under Joshua's command.
I've been saying all along in this series, there are a lot of parallels between Israel's physical during the wilderness and our spiritual journey as followers of Jesus.
And like Israel, we too face conflict and foes.
It's not hard to make those connections, but they are different foes.
Israel was facing physical foes.
Our foes are not the same, which means our fight
has to be on completely different terms.
You know the passage well comes out of Ephesians chapter six.
We're not fighting against flesh and blood enemies, but against evil rulers and authorities of the unseen world, against mighty powers in this dark world and against evil spirits in the heavenly places.
Our our battle is a spiritual battle.
Jesus made the same distinction when he appeared before Pilate.
Remember he's there before Pilate and Pilate's headquarters and Pilate says to him, are you the king of the Jews?
Jesus answered, my kingdom is not of this world.
If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would have been fighting that I might not be delivered over to the Jews, but my kingdom is not from this world.
There is a fight to be had, Pilate, but it's not the fight you think it is.
I am a king, but not the way you think about kings, not the way that you think about the political world.
I sent out a survey a few weeks ago.
A lot of you responded to that.
Thank you very much.
If you've been meaning to get around to it, it's too late.
But I was asking you, what are things you would like to hear me teach on?
What would you like me to address?
And it was interesting.
There was a lot of folks who came back and said, man, I wish you would talk about politics.
And I can't think of a topic I like to talk about less.
But I think we all know that these are very contentious times in our country when it comes to the world of politics.
And specifically within the Christian world, there's this thing called Christian nationalism.
Now people debate exactly what that term even means, but at its core I think what you find is this mixing of a robust nationalized America first allegiance combined with a loudly professed allegiance to Christ.
And then you add to that a deep allegiance to partisan politics
And you end up with something that I think both distorts the gospel to the world around us.
And so often leads to some deep divisions and bitterness within the church.
Friendships get ruined, families get divided.
I've known churches that split.
Why?
Because I think a lot of us have bought into a mindset at times that says those who oppose us
have to be vilified and heated and crushed.
Because that's how you fight.
It's all for good cause.
It's all because we're hoping for a righteous end.
And in a righteous end, maybe it justifies a few short-term unrighteous strategies.
And all of it is rooted in a conviction that God is on our side.
I came across a concept recently called motive attribution asymmetry, which a lot of big words, but it's pretty simple idea.
It's when the hostility between people erupts, and both sides believe that they're being driven by love and their opponents by hate.
You've probably seen that.
Both sides suspect the worst of the other.
And of course, if those I disagree with are hateful, well, that makes me angry.
That makes me want to hate them back.
Columnist Arthur Brooks and a recent op-ed suggested that when anger is combined with another very natural emotion discussed, that we end up with contempt.
At a making this point, he recounts a conversation he once had with John Gottman, maybe no Gottman of the Gottman Institute.
It's a famous counseling center dedicated to helping marriages.
They have helped thousands of couples who have been facing divorce.
And Gottman told him,
He said he could usually tell within 15 minutes with 94% accuracy if a couple is going to make it.
He said the key was when they discussed conflict, does either of them roll their eyes or otherwise display contempt for their partner?
So if I see that one of them has contempt for their partner, the chance for that marriage to survive is pretty remote.
I would say that certainly applies in the world of politics as well.
When we view whole segments of our fellow citizens with contempt, it's very hard to find peace.
It's very hard to share the gospel.
As I talk with other pastors, this festering issue of political contempt within congregations comes up regularly.
I'll give you one little example.
I got an email a couple weeks ago from someone who is not a part of DCC, but they are highly active in these things.
And he wanted me to know about an upcoming event on a current social hot-button issue, an issue which, by the way, he and I would agree on.
So we want to talk about sides.
I would be on his side.
What was intriguing was the way he invited me to attend.
This is the sum total of the messages I received.
Do you care or are you a fraud?
That was a compelling invitation right there.
You can hear what he's saying.
What he's saying is, come on, Tim, whose side are you on?
There's no room for discussion.
It's my way or the highway.
It's us or them.
It's the problem of political partisanship becoming equated with godliness.
Back in 2018, the late Timothy Keller wrote an editorial in The New York Times titled, How Do Christians Fit Into the Two-Party System?
They don't.
Let me read you just one piece out of that.
Another reason Christians these days cannot allow the church to be fully identified with any particular party is the problem of what British ethicist James Munford calls, package deal ethics.
Increasingly, political parties insist
that you cannot work on one issue with them if you don't embrace all of their approved positions.
Over the past few years, I have had multiple people tell me that they have considered not coming to church because they're not comfortable being with people they realize may support one political position or another.
And those comments have come from across the political spectrum.
It's not just one side of those issues.
Worse, even as I say that, there may be some of you, I hope few of you, but there may be some of you are thinking, well that's fine if they don't come.
If they don't agree with me, they should stay home.
And if that's anywhere in your heart, I would simply have to ask whose army you are in.
Who is your commander?
Do you realize when Jesus chose his 12 closest disciples
after a full night of prayer that he included among them a zealot and a tax collector, you could not get farther apart on the political spectrum than a zealot and a tax collector.
The zealots who wanted to violently overthrow the Romans and the tax collectors who made their living by collecting Rome's taxes.
Jesus called them to something beyond those politics.
He called them to follow him.
And it turned out that following him put all of them at odds with their preferred political factions.
Both the anti-government zealots and the pro-government tax collectors found themselves out of step with their people because they were in step with Jesus.
I'll give you just one more illustration of how this kind of affects me sometimes.
This summer we were doing that series on the minor prophets.
And one of the things that came up over and over in the minor prophets are the ways that the rich and powerful were oppressing and abusing the poor and the weak.
And the command of the Lord that I encountered over and over again was to do justice.
We saw that in the past, we read earlier from Micah, right?
Do you realize how often I wrestled over how best to discuss that concept?
of justice.
Why?
Because I knew that preaching about social justice was apt to trigger some people to conclude, well, Tim must be woke, which would either make them super happy or super mad.
Not because that conclusion was fueled by an allegiance to Jesus as much as it was trying to figure out if
By using that word, I'm either affirming or repudiating their political agenda.
Just by using the word justice, say, by the way, completely biblical word, some start asking internally, well, whose side is he on?
My intent is never to push, either a woke or a mega-informed agenda.
because I believe that both march lock step into some serious errors.
My heart's desire is not to be on the left side or the right side, but by God's grace to be on His side.
And please hear me.
I don't say that with any sense of superiority.
I am, as though I'm above all of that, because I am not.
You get me fired up on the right topic and I am just as apt as the next guy to confidently say way more than I actually know.
Jesus has had me on a journey these past few years.
Here's what began to catch my attention in me.
I began to detect this subtle tendency in my heart to defend, excuse, minimize,
things happening within my preferred party, the very things that I had criticized as unrighteous and the other guys.
A willingness to label what was clearly not aligned with the way of Jesus on the other side of the political divide as evil.
And yet, when it was on my side of the aisle, I was willing to excuse it.
After all, I figured God must be on my side.
I've been convicted, and that conviction has led me to become an increasingly unreliable partisan.
My core convictions haven't changed, but my loyalties are less and less moored to parties, politics, or personalities.
The chasm between the Holy Spirit's leading and the ways the world wants to lead have become ever wider in my conscience.
I don't have it on the screen, but this morning I ran across Psalm 118 verses eight and nine, it says this.
It's better to take refuge in the Lord than to trust in man.
It is better to take refuge in the Lord than to trust in princes.
So how does our commander want us to fight in highly contentious times?
Where do we position ourselves to make sure that we're on his side and not simply trying to co-opt God to our agenda?
For me, it begins with a continual call to humility, a commitment to listen more and speak less, an ongoing prayer for true godly wisdom, free of prejudice, and in the places I discover pride or hypocrisy in my own heart, that there be sincere repentance.
So how do we view and treat those with whom we strongly disagree?
Because there are people whom I strongly disagree.
I think they are wrong.
Biblically, I think they are wrong.
And some of those people, if we sat down and talked, they wouldn't like me.
They might hate me.
They might view me with contempt.
So what am I supposed to do?
Well, here's a direct command from our Joshua, Jesus, the command of the Lord's army.
Here's what he said, Matthew, chapter five.
You've heard that it was said, you shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy.
But I say to you, love your enemies.
Pray for those who persecute you so that you may be sons of your father who is in heaven, for he makes his son rise on the evil and on the good, the Republicans and the Democrats, and sends rain on the just and the unjust.
That is what our commander calls us to do.
If any earthly leader tells you otherwise,
Do not follow.
Let's pray.
Well, I just confess for myself.
I confess that sometimes in my zeal for what is right, I've gotten caught up in my own pride.
Sometimes, like those Pharisees that you once talked about, I am quick to spot the specs
in the eyes of others and I miss the planks in my own.
Father forgive us, forgive us if we have ever made the mistake of thinking that you need to be on our side because all we need to be is on your side.
Thank you that you are our deliverer.
Thank you for what the cross means that you came to us in our sinfulness, in our pride,
in our anger, and you did for us what we were completely unable to do for ourselves.
You opened a way for us to be in your family.
Thank you for that great, awesome, humbling privilege of being your children.
Let me pray that you would help us to live our lives in such a way, to live our lives in such a contentious world.
That the world would look at us and not just see
another batch of political operatives, but they would see people, while they may not even be able to explain what's going on, they recognize that we are marching to a different drum beat.
We are followers of a different commander.
And Lord, may it come out in everything that we do, that we would be people who truly love, even those that we might consider enemies.
I asked this in Jesus' name.
Amen.